---
title: "PhD Thesis Defence: Mr. Anuj Dash (01/09/23)"
permalink: /defence/anuj-01-sep-2023
---
### Thesis title:
Solving The Unsolved In Multicomponent Diffusion: The Concept Of Constrained Diffusion Couple Methods

### Faculty advisor(s):
Prof. Aloke Paul 

### When?
1<sup>st</sup> September, 2023 (Friday), 11:00 AM (India Standard Time)

### Where
KPA Auditorium, Dept of Materials Engineering

### Abstract
Diffusion studies in multicomponent systems present formidable  challenges even after half a century of work in the field since the s= ystematization of the phenomenological formalism of diffusion. The chemical interdiffusion method is the most popular approach for  experimental studies in diffusion. However, the requirement to fulfil  the stringent mathematical conditions of Onsager’s formalism in  experimental studies of multicomponent systems has historically limited  most studies to binary and ternary systems. Historically, all types of  diffusion coefficients could be estimated in binary systems, while only  interdiffusion coefficients were estimated in ternary systems. The  experimental complications associated with the need to intersect (n-1)  serpentine diffusion paths in the n dimensional space led to unsolved  problems and estimation of composition dependent diffusion coefficients  were considered impossible for higher order systems until recently. The  lack of diffusivity data in multicomponent systems has hampered the  generating mobility databases essential for microstructural simulation  and correlation with various physical and mechanical properties of  materials highlighting the performance and durability of the product. 

 Recently, a number of new methods that elegantly overcome the  experimental difficulties in fulfilling the mathematical preconditions  in multicomponent systems have come to fore, thus enabling the  estimation of the diffusivities. NiCoFeCr Multi Principal Element (MPE)  system is considered as a model system for these analyses to compare the  data estimated by the new methods proposed in this thesis with the  available radiotracer data for the equiatomic alloy. 

 This work first explores the intricacies of the pseudo-binary (PB)  diffusion couple approach in the NiCoCr system and later extends it to  the NiCoFeCr system. The evolution of the mathematical formalism for  pseudo-binary diffusion couples from conventional multicomponent  systems, and its extension to estimate the interdiffusion coefficients  and then the modifications to Darken-Manning relations necessary for the  determination of the intrinsic and tracer coefficients from PB couples  for the equiatomic NiCoFeCr alloy is explored in this section. 

 This work then extends the recently proposed pseudo-ternary (PT) method  by modifying the Darken-Manning formalism for the case of three  components developing a diffusion profile, keeping rest of the  components constant, to enable the calculation of tracer coefficients  and the intrinsic coefficients at the intersection of two PT diffusion  paths. Application of the PT approach to the NiCoFeCr system via two  different sets of PT diffusion couples (Cr constant and Fe constant)  enables the estimation of the tracer coefficients of all four components  which can be subsequently used to estimate the intrinsic and  interdiffusion coefficients as well. 

 The body diagonal method originally proposed for determination of  interdiffusion coefficients only is extended in this thesis for benefits  of determination of the tracer coefficients of all elements from only  two diffusion profiles. This reduces the laborious task of producing  (n-1) diffusion paths that need to pass within negligible but equal  distances to each other to reduce the complex unknown errors that arise  due to the lack of direct intersection between the diffusion paths.  Using the modified body diagonal approach proposed in this work, the  tracer coefficients of all components can be estimated from the  intersection of just two diffusion paths, which can be used to estimate  the conventional intrinsic and interdiffusion coefficients by the  application of Darken-Manning (with vacancy wind effect) or  Kirklady-Lane relations (without vacancy wind effect). The obtained  tracer diffusion coefficients show a good match with the data estimated  from radio tracer methods extended to the temperature of interest. 

 This work then explores the possibilities of intersecting diffusion  paths of a dissimilar nature to take advantage of the constrained nature  of the PB and PT diffusion paths to target intersection at a specific  composition and also determine diffusivities of all components from a  single set of experiments only. First, we demonstrated that intersecting  a PT diffusion path with a PB diffusion path is easier compared to  intersecting two similar PT diffusion paths. Further, we have  demonstrated that intersecting two, but dissimilar PT diffusion paths  brings the advantage of estimation of diffusion coefficients of four  elements. Following, we demonstrated that intersecting a conventional  diffusion path in which all the elements produce the diffusion profiles  by a rectilinear diffusion path of a PB couple is far easier for  estimation of diffusion coefficient of all the elements in  multicomponent systems with any number of elements (n≥3). This overcomes  the limitations of all the methods demonstrated until now for estimation  of diffusion coefficients of all the elements by intersecting only two  diffusion paths at a desired composition. The equation scheme required  for such analysis is established and described in detail. The influence  of vacancy wind effect on the intrinsic coefficients and the interdiffus= ion coefficients is studied in detail to demonstrate the importance of estimating the diffusivities considering the vacancy wind  effect. Vacancy wind factor strongly influences certain cross  coefficients, to the extent that it may even change the sign of certain  cross coefficients as well. Compared to the intrinsic coefficients,  however interdiffusion coefficients are relatively less affected by the  vacancy wind factor but it is still crucial to consider the vacancy wind  factor in the calculations. 

 Having established the efficacy of these approaches in the NiCoFeCr  system, the ideas are extended to the five component NiCoFeCrAl to  estimate the diffusivities of all the components. Following, a design  strategy for intersecting the diffusion paths in Ni-Co-Fe-Cr-Al  multi-principal element alloy is demonstrated. This is guided by the  possibilities of producing PB diffusion profiles in the NiCoFeCr system,  This, for the first time, facilitates the estimation of the tracer,  intrinsic, and interdiffusion coefficients of all the elements purely  experimentally in this quinary system. The tracer diffusion coefficients  estimated in this quinary system are compared with the impurity and  tracer diffusion coefficients in pure Ni (taken from literature), and at  (or near) equiatomic compositions of binary Ni-Co, ternary Ni-Co-Cr, and  quaternary Ni-Co-Fe-Cr systems estimated in this study. The relative  mobilities of the elements are found to follow the trend D_Ni^ 

<(>= <<)>D_Co^ 

<(><<)>D_Fe^ 

<(><<)>D_Cr^ 

<(><<)>D_Al^ 

 in all the systems. However, the tracer diffusion coefficients of the elements  first decrease and then increase with the increasing order of the  systems. The contribution of the vacancy wind effect on certain  cross-intrinsic diffusion coefficients is found to be very significant  and cannot be ignored. The influence of the vacancy wind effect on  interdiffusion coefficients is found to be less significant compared to  the intrinsic diffusion coefficients since interdiffusion coefficients  are kind of average of multiple intrinsic diffusion coefficients. We h= ave further shown that describing the relative mobilities of the elements with main interdiffusion coefficients instead of the  tracer diffusion coefficients can be misleading or confusing.  Consideration of different elements as the dependent component of  interdiffusion coefficients may indicate a very different or even a  completely opposite trend for the diffusivities. 

 The methods described in this work are simple and enable the estimation  of tracer diffusion coefficients as well as intrinsic diffusion and  interdiffusion coefficients from interdiffusion based experiments. The  advantage of the need for only two diffusion paths for the estimation of  all types of diffusion coefficients is demonstrated, which are needed  for understanding the nature of diffusion paths (from the interdiffusion  coefficients) or the data (tracer and intrinsic diffusion coefficients)  needed for microstructural simulation and correlation with the  high-temperature mechanical properties. This can now be extended to  other systems, for example, Ni, Co, and Fe-rich multicomponent materials  used extensively in various applications or the Al, Si, Pt, etc.  containing materials in which the radiotracer method cannot be utilized. 