---
title: "PhD Thesis Defence: Mr. Sahibzada Roohan Farooq Lala (08/12/23)"
permalink: /defence/roohan-08-dec-2023
---
### Thesis title:
Microstructure-Corrosion Property Correlation in Electrodeposited Sn and  Cu Based Coating Systems

### Faculty advisor(s):
Prof. Chandan Srivastava

### When?
08<sup>th</sup> December, 2023 (Friday), 10:00 AM (India Standard Time)

### Where
Online

### Abstract
Conventional metallic coatings are widely used for protection against  corrosion. This study investigates the correlation between mi= crostructure and corrosion properties in SnCr and CuCr electrodeposited coatings. The wide immiscibility of SnCr and CuCr systems  would facilitate chromium's segregation in the high energy grain  boundary regions, enhancing the corrosion resistance due to the forma= tion of the stable Cr2O3 phase. The first part of the study was focused on developing SnCr and CuCr coatings with varying Cr  content. Microstructural analysis using STEM revealed Cr segregation at  the grain boundaries of the matrix phases, along with the evolution of  solid solution SnCr and CuCr phases. For both SnCr and CuCr coatings,  the corrosion rate (determined using Potentiodynamic Polarization and  Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy) varied non-monotonically with Cr  concentration, and at an optimum Cr concentration, the highest corrosion  resistance was achieved. Higher corrosion resistance at lower Cr  concentrations was attributed to Cr-oxide formation and the evolution of  low-energy surface texture and grain boundary constitution. The higher  corrosion rate at higher Cr additions was primarily due to increased  coating strain. In the second part of the work, the SnCr and CuCr  coatings with the lowest corrosion rate were co-deposited with graphene  oxide (GO) as reinforcement. The corrosion rate of the coatings was  sensitive to the volume fraction of the added GO, and at an optimum  volume fraction, the lowest corrosion rate was noticed. The corrosion  resistance improvement was due to the impermeable and inert nature of  the GO sheets. The incorporation of GO promoted SnCr coating growth  along the low energy (100) plane, while in the case of CuCr coating,  surface texture revealed dominant low energy (111) planes. GO also i= ncreased the fraction of low energy low angle grain boundaries (LAGBs) and coincidence site lattices (CSLs) in both coating  systems, thereby enhancing corrosion resistance. A high GO concentration  led to high corrosion rates in composite coatings primarily because of  the agglomeration of GO and potential galvanic coupling between the  anodic metallic matrix and the cathodic GO sheets. The third part of the  work involved the investigation of the effect of the deposition  temperature (15ºC - 45ºC) on the microstructure and corrosion behaviour  of electrodeposited SnCr and CuCr coatings. The low electrodeposition  temperature (15ºC) yielded coating with the lowest corrosion rate. The  surface morphology of the coatings exhibited significant changes because  of variations in the deposition temperature. This effect can be  attributed to the alterations in deposition kinetics, which, in turn,  influenced the nucleation and growth mechanisms of the coatings. The  coating grain size decreased with a decrease in the deposition  temperature. For the SnCr system, the preferred orientation along the  low energy (100) plane, a high fraction of LAGBs, and low average strain  within the grains gave rise to better corrosion resistance. Similarly,  for the CuCr system, 15°C coating exhibited higher corrosion resistance  due to (111) preferred orientation, smaller grain size, increased CSL  boundaries, and Ʃ3 coherent twin boundaries.