---
title: "PhD Thesis Defence: Mr. Anindo Roy (04/12/23)"
permalink: /defence/anindo-04-dec-2023
---
### Thesis title:
Bioinspiration for battling bacteria: Nature inspired high aspect ratio  nanostructures for new age antibacterial surfaces

### Faculty advisor(s):
Prof. Kaushik Chatterjee

### When?
04<sup>th</sup> December, 2023 (Monday), 10:30 AM (India Standard Time)

### Where
KI Vasu Auditorium, Dept of Materials Engineering

### Abstract
Deaths due to bacterial infections are rising across the globe and  conventional biochemical approaches of treating them using antibiotics  are at the risk of becoming obscure due to emergence of drug-resistant  strains. Alternative approaches based on biophysical antibacterial  mechanisms can be the dark horse in the fight against antimicrobial  resistance, however, successful translation and commercially viable  widespread adoption is dependent on clear understanding of the key  bactericidal mechanisms and development of cheap, scalable  nanofabrication strategies. To this end, in this work, high aspect ratio  nanostructures are fabricated on titanium using dry etching in plasma  and it is demonstrated that the nanostructure formation takes place due  to micro-masking of the titanium surface with chemical species generated  during the etch process. Furthermore, etching recipes are developed for  titanium and poly (ethylene terephthalate) based on studies of the  effects of several process parameters in dry etching, which are used to  fabricate nanostructures with extremely high aspect ratios to study  their bactericidal efficacy. It is shown that an increase in aspect  ratio affects the nanomechanical properties of the structures and leads  to formation of superstructures which can affect their bactericidal  efficacy. Moreover, external capillary forces are shown to be capable of  enhancing the killing efficiency by exerting a downward force on the  bacterial cells. Finally, metal oxide nanotubes generated by  electrochemical anodization are demonstrated to be equally effective as  nanopillars in eliminating bacteria, but with the additional benefit of  scalability, low cost, and the ability to generate such topographies on  complex, 3D geometries. The work to be presented is of critical  importance in developing an understanding of how bacteria interact with  high aspect ratio nanostructures and will find applications in  development of next generation implant and touch surfaces.